---
title: "Group Bias and the Complexity/Accuracy Tradeoff in Machine Learning-Based Trauma Triage Models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-05-04-tradeoff
excerpt: 'Work by Kate on evaluating group bias in machine learning models for trauma triage.'
date: 2023-05-04
venue: 'FLAIRS-36'
paperurl: 'https://journals.flvc.org/FLAIRS/article/view/133358'
citation: 'Brown KE, Talbert S, Talbert DA. &quot;A QUEST for Model Assessment: Identifying Difficult Subgroups via Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification.&quot; <i>Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association Annual Symposium</i>, 2023.'
---
This paper won the award for Best Student Paper at the FLAIRS-36 conference!

Trauma triage occurs in suboptimal environments for making consequential decisions. Published triage studies demonstrate the extremes of the complexity/accuracy tradeoff, either studying simple models with poor accuracy or very complex models with accuracies nearing published goals. Using a Level I Trauma Center’s registry cases (n=50,644), this study describes, uses, and derives observations from a methodology to more thoroughly examine this tradeoff. This or similar methods can provide the insight needed for practitioners to balance understandability with accuracy. Additionally, this study incorporates an evaluation of group-based fairness into this tradeoff analysis to provide an additional dimension of insight into model selection. The experiments allow us to draw several conclusions regarding the machine learning models in the domain of trauma triage and demonstrate the value of our tradeoff analysis to provide insight into choices regarding model complexity, model accuracy, and model fairness.

[Download paper here.](https://journals.flvc.org/FLAIRS/article/view/133358)

Recommended citation: Phillips KL, Brown KE, Talbert S, Talbert DA. “Group Bias and the Complexity/Accuracy Tradeoff in Machine Learning-Based Trauma Triage Models.” <i>Proceedings of the Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS-36)</i>, 2023.